fully five years ago there was a
controversy
raging on youtube about gerson therapy
this was a controversy that drew in such
luminaries of the medium
as a natural vegan and durianrider
sooner or later i myself also voiced my
opinion on the issue
but one of the reasons why i'm making
this video today is that i think
a great deal of the evidence about what
happened and why
has now disappeared it's become
inaccessible or just
impossible to find yes this is in part
because some people just
deleted their whole channel quit the
game it's in part because some people
uploaded apology videos and then deleted
the earlier videos
they made on the controversy and it is
in part because of the
changing system of censorship here on
youtube
that makes some things impossible to
find even if they're here
and erases others from existence
entirely this is the year 2020
when mainstream inoffensive channels
like
leafy leafy is here can disappear in the
blink of an eye
over a minor controversy so how much
more likely is it that some of these
voices have been silenced
because of the provocative nature of
gerson therapy
and the incredibly hot-tempered disputes
it inspired
within veganism and the shall we say
unwanted critical attention it drew in
from
non-vegans ex-vegans anti-vegans
without right
gerson therapy is not vegan
it never was vegan it has nothing to do
with veganism
in principle it is anti-vegan
the man who invented it dr gerson
recommended that people ingest
raw calf liver raw
veal liver exactly how it was they were
to ingest it whether it was through
eating or injections i think
varies now this in part reflects a more
19th century notion that the internal
organs of animals
have some kind of miraculous healing
powers that eating their
muscle tissue does not but it in part
reflects the underlying
hypothesis of gerson therapy that
what dr gerson was going to do was to
cure cancer
by stimulating or regenerating the
activity
of the liver now it's just worth
pointing out
even if that hypothesis were valid
it is incorrect you can't cure
cancer that would even if you remove
someone's liver and give them a whole
new liver
that's not going to cure them of lung
cancer that just it can't possibly work
now of course secondarily eating
or injecting yourself with the liver
of a cow or a calf
is not going to regenerate the function
of your own liver
right this is like a little kid who's
read superman comics and really is
thinking in a
very mechanistic way about health you
know
how does superman's x-ray vision work oh
we just draw draw a dotted line
going from his eyes and then he sees the
x-rays don't shoot out of your eyes do
they
it doesn't really make sense that eating
a cow's liver or even injecting yourself
with a
cow liver paste would improve the
function of your liver in this same way
the fundamental principles of the plan
of gerson therapy has nothing to do with
modern claims 21st century claims
that veganism will reduce your chances
of getting cancer or will help you cope
with cancer if you've already got it you
only have a few years left to live
those claims however controversial they
may be
have absolutely nothing to do with
gerson therapy in theory arm practice
now how did this become such a behemoth
of a controversy that again if you
weren't alive at that time or if you
weren't
on youtube watching these youtube videos
before they were deleted in a storm of
controversy
you cannot imagine how intensely felt
the passions were surrounding this
controversy
there was a particular woman named jen
journey who made some very emotive
videos weeping into the camera
talking about how she was dying of
cancer and how she was asking for
donations so that she could undergo this
frankly insane gerson treatment
that is illegal in most
modern western countries and it is
banned by
health regulations in others but you
know there are some operations and some
procedures where
if you can't get them in the united
states you can go
somewhere south of the border and it's
either
legal or the laws are simply not being
enforced
so this was indeed a case where she
wanted to leave the united states of
america and seek this
quote alternative close quote medical
treatment
elsewhere and some of these videos were
very emotive now
you can't look at those emotional
moments
captured on video in isolation
just to understand the emotion she was
pouring out on camera
requires a little bit more analysis a
little bit more context a little bit
more research
a little bit more fact-checking than
that this particular woman
she had watched her mother suffer
with cancer suffer through conventional
cancer therapy cancer treatment medical
treatment hospital system
and she felt that this was so awful this
was so terrible to behold
and i believe eventually her mother did
die of cancer or complications thereof
she took a vow she swore that if she
were ever in that situation herself
she would simply refuse all treatment
and die with dignity
depending on what country you live in
you may or may not have the legal right
to do that
okay the right to refuse medical
treatment
no matter how valid no matter how it may
save your life or improve your condition
you may or may not have the right to
make that decision no matter where you
are
and the authorities may or may not be
interested in forcing
the law wherever you are also um nobody
wants to force someone to undergo
cancer treatment against their will very
messy sort of situation
that is really the fundamental key to
understanding the situation
this didn't have to do with veganism it
had to do with a kind of
crackpot alternative medicine therapy
and to this woman's credit
she was not embracing that crackpot
therapy as a
miracle cure she was embracing it
as an alternative to conventional
treatment that she refused to
participate in
she was if you like wanting to embrace
it
as a kind of palliative care
the precise meaning of palliative care
is worth emphasizing here
it was something she wanted to do to
make herself
feel better to enjoy her last few months
or last few
years of life however you want to put it
now i have no doubt that some people who
subscribe to the gerson therapy
uh philosophy really do believe
that it's a medical cure i think a lot
of people give in to
wishful thinking there are different
there's a different set of ethical
questions to be asked
if people are choosing this not as a
false
cure but as a real form
of palliative care it's like one of the
comparisons i made was what if someone
told you
that they wanted donations so that they
could fly around the world
and go and see the pyramids and the
great wall of china
before they die they want to go to egypt
and china it's not going to cure cancer
it's just something you could call it
palliative care
it's something they want to do with
something i want to experience for the
day
i do not know why anyone would want to
frequently have coffee
stuffed up their bum before they die
yes yes y'all along with the other
completely air sats
non-vegan non-scientifically valid um
treatments gerson therapy involves yes
the the almighty coffee enema
for some people reason people find it
easy to talk themselves into believing
that says miraculous benefits
the list of things you would do um when
undergoing gross in therapy
much less appealing than going to see
the pyramids
uh in egypt going to visit with china
nevertheless already there's a real
difference between how this story was
reported and what it actually meant for
this woman okay
unnatural vegan entered into the
controversy
at that time she was interested in
defending the
principles of reason skepticism and
science
she has lost all interest in that in the
years since
maybe maybe that event itself was really
what shook her out of being interested
in that kind of
science reporting a skeptical approach
because it it stopped that disappeared
from her act that's not what her channel
is about
at all anymore um durianrider entered
into the controversy
because he just stated his sheer
speculation that he thought that what
this woman was doing was a fundraising
scam like he didn't believe
the story was was credible at all he
later made
an apology video for that in which he
explained that basically
he is a bumpkin who grew up in a small
town with
no education and that he basically
regards everything
he sees on the internet as a scam until
otherwise proven to be valid
although that is not a useful reasonable
or intelligent explanation
i think that really was his perspective
i think that's i think there's some
honesty even if that's a
wildly irrational account of what
happened from durianrider's side
a much stranger apology video
was put on the internet by a natural
vegan where it's
really not clear what she's apologizing
for
or why why it is that she's not standing
up and saying
hey either you believe in scientific
treatment for cancer you don't
and if you allow these types of lies to
be spread on the internet
about so-called alternative therapies
those are lies that have a body count
those are lies that'll actually kill
people
i'm sorry what i've just said is in a
parallel universe
what a natural vegan could have said or
should have said she said nothing of the
kind she made this weird
stammering self-contradictory apology
video where it really just seems she was
pandering to every part of the audience
she wants to be loved and adored by
people who are pro-science and
pro-skepticism and she wants to be loved
endured by
hippies hippies who want to believe in
coffee enemas and you know crazy
alternative science you think it's a
terrible thing
that she made this video criticizing uh
you know a fundraiser for a woman who
was dying of cancer
so that is how the controversy
ended here we are in the year 2020
when due to the changing face
of youtube as a corporation due to the
changing rules of internet censorship
it would be more difficult than ever for
someone to put together the pieces of
this puzzle and
learn the lessons i think really
important lessons
that were there for all of us to learn
in this strange clash between the
hippie alternative medicine self-healing
through diet subculture
and veganism as it was then just
starting to emerge
five years ago as a new 21st century
ethical and political movement because
at that time
in terms of who was on the internet and
who was using youtube
the hippies who believed in coffee
enemas
really outnumbered the people who were
involved in veganism for
ecological reasons ethical reasons
political reasons
uh we were badly badly outnumbered by
people who
believed in magic uh put it that way i
make this video today
as a gift to my number one fan fandar
fandar is a youtuber who has for about
five years actually bitterly hated me
harassed me and defamed me on the
internet
and just within the last few days fandar
tried to make a video
talking about this controversy this
carnivorous that i haven't thought about
for about four years now
hasn't hasn't come up hasn't crossed my
mind and
i was struck that there were a lot of
factual errors in fanduel's video
which i think was a well-intentioned
video it was the thing was trying to
offer critique
and look at why did doreen writer do the
terrible things he did and why did the
natural vegan do the terrible thing
trying to make sense of this but of
course it occurred to me
if people like myself don't stand up and
tell the story
now it really would be very difficult
for anyone else to put the the pieces
of the puzzle back together again but
fandaar
and i say this to you assist anyone out
there who's aspiring to
get their own youtube channel rolling
right you have to start taking yourself
seriously
as a journalist what we do here on
youtube
in the year 2020 it's really much more
important
than journalism it really relies much
more
on honesty and integrity
as i used to say five years ago i mean
keeping it real is all that we've got